## Chapter 9: Selfish Violence Vs Violence-In-Service

Growing up in the United States, I heard a lot of people say that peace is good, and violence is bad. And sure, peace may be preferable, but when another group attacks, and escape is impossible, a group of people may face a choice: use violence in self-defense, or submit to the attackers.

Even if I desire peace, I don't see violence as inherently good or bad -- it's a question of how a person or group uses violence. Do they use violence selfishly, hurting others for their own personal benefit and lying about it? Or do people use violence in service of the group, in a way that benefits the people and nonhumans they love?

### Selfish Violence in Unhealthy Cultures

In unhealthy cultures where people are not able to hold their leaders accountable, selfish violence is common. Often the leaders will want to go to war for selfish reasons that would never motivate the public to go along.

After all, who would risk their lives just to help rich people become a little richer? Thus politicians will make up fake motivations for the war, and peace activists will notice the lies and try to point out the truth. Then politicians will accuse the peace activists of being traitors spreading enemy propaganda to keep the country from uniting in support of the military. As Nazi leader Hermann Goering said after World War II, "whether it is a democracy or a fascist dictatorship or a parliament or a communist dictatorship... It works the same way in any country."

In Germany, the United States, and many other countries as I write, anyone who opposes increased war against Russia in Ukraine risks being called a "Putin lover" or "Putin troll" -- Vladimir Putin being the president of Russia. Politicians in these countries maintain the fiction that Russia invaded Ukraine unprovoked, but when activists try to point out all the provocations -- such as the NATO military alliance expanding to Russian borders, putting nuclear-capable missiles on Russian borders, and arming the Ukrainian military for the purpose of going to war with Russia -- when activists try to point out these facts and the government's lies, in the hopes of avoiding an unnecessary war, they are accused of spreading Russian propaganda.

A common way for rulers to motivate the public to fight a war that will only benefit the rulers and rich is to stage a fake attack, known as a "false flag attack". Rulers attack their own people, and then blame it on the country they want to attack. In 1939, the Soviet military attacked one of their own towns in secret, blamed the Finnish, and used that as an excuse to start the Winter War. The Nazi Germans burned the parliament building but blamed it on the communists as an excuse to outlaw the Communist party in Germany.

In 1999, the Russian federal police secretly installed bombs in Russian apartment buildings. Some people became suspicious when a parliament member accidentally described one of the bombings before it happened. They became more suspicious when local police actually caught some of the perpetrators planting a live bomb -- and they turned out to be Russian federal police agents! No one was punished for this. But the government blamed the attacks on Osama bin Laden and soon invaded Chechnya on the pretense of protecting the country.

Likewise, in the United States the government blamed Osama bin Laden for the 9/11 attacks in 2001, and used these as an excuse to invade Afghanistan and Iraq. However, in recent years the US federal police have revealed documents indicating that Saudi nationals on the payroll of the Saudi embassy supported the 9/11 attacks, including helping the 9/11 attackers with lodging, financing, translation, and travel. The Saudi ambassador was the billionaire prince Bandar, a good friend of the US president George W Bush. Somehow, the Saudis and Bush family escaped any investigation or punishment for their support of the 9/11 attacks. Like the Russian government, the American government leaders got the war they wanted.

Whether Russia, the USA, Ireland, Germany, France, Tibet, Great Britain, or any other unhealthy culture, the problem is the same: people have allowed selfishness to take hold in their culture, and most of them resign themselves to tolerating abuse and not standing for what's right.

Many people hesitate to believe these stories, because it is so repugnant to imagine people of one's own country lying and acting so deeply selfishly. And yet this is simply a normal problem in cultures that tolerate selfishness and abuse, and do not hold their leaders accountable. This sort of selfish behavior simply continues endlessly, while peace activists are punished for standing for the truth and trying to avoid unnecessary, selfish violence. 

### Violence-in-Service in Healthy Cultures and Subcultures

Stories of collective self-defense show how people can use violence responsibly, in service of the community instead of selfishly.

The Black Panthers were an American black revolutionary organization active in the 1960s and 1970s. While they had many programs, including making clothing and breakfasts available to poor black children, one of their most famous actions was to have a few warriors trail police cars. When the police officers would pull over another motorist, these Panthers would pull over within seeing distance behind the police car. Without interfering at all, the Panthers displayed weapons, letting the officers know that they would take a stand if the officers acted abusively.

These warriors didn't risk violence for personal gain. They acted to protect their community and inspired huge numbers of people to join the Panthers. I believe one reason so many people joined the Panthers was exactly this willingness to use or threaten to use violence in service of the community, to establish healthy boundaries that forbade abusive behavior.

The Bedonkohe Apache warrior Geronimo offered another example of violence-in-service. His people believed they were at peace with the Mexicans, and so when he and many other warriors went into a Mexican town to trade, they only left behind a token force to protect the camp and the women, children, and elders. When the warriors returned, they found that Mexican soldiers had killed the entire protection force and many of their families. Geronimo had lost more than anyone -- his mother, wife, and all his children were dead. He later told his biographer, "I had lost all."

The warriors did not have enough weapons or people to stand up to the Mexicans that night, so they left to safety. After replenishing supplies, Bedonkohe Apache chief Mangus-Colorado called a war council, and the warriors decided to go to war. They invited other Apache groups to participate, and Geronimo went to them one by one, telling them what had happened, describing the risks of not standing up for themselves, and asking them to participate in a war against the Mexicans.

There was no draft, and none of the warriors were poor people seeking to escape poverty. Each one decided for themselves to fight as he or she saw fit, knowing the risks and deciding if the benefit was worth it. Geronimo recruited many people.

Finally all the warriors assembled. They had set several safe havens where the children and other noncombatants would safely stay, ensuring everyone in their communities was taken care of. Instead of putting the richest or most political powerful person in charge, the Apache agreed to make Geronimo their war leader, knowing he was extremely motivated to defeat the Mexicans after what he'd lost.

Finally they tracked down the Mexicans, including two companies of infantry and two of cavalry. Geronimo sent flanking detachments and led advances and they kept fighting even as all the Apaches' arrows were spent and their spears were broken. After hours of vicious fighting, many Mexicans and Apaches lay dead on the ground. Finally the Apache warriors were the only ones remaining, having fully vanquished the Mexicans. The ferocious Apache war-whoop rang over the gruesome field.

The Zapatistas are a healthy culture in southern North America, many of whose members are from local indigenous groups. After 500 years of oppression by the Spanish and Mexicans, and 10 years of careful planning, they rose up in revolution on January 1st, 1994. Unlike shallow revolutions that replace one ruling class with another, so that the lives of most people don't change much, the Zapatistas remembered how to have a healthy culture where everyone upholds the laws. 

The Mexican military and the Zapatista military, known as the EZLN, clashed almost immediately in the Zapatistas' home region of Chiapas, Mexico in the south east. Official fighting continued until a ceasefire was called.

However, this official ceasefire was not the end of the violence. The Mexican Ministry of Defense illegally organized paramilitary forces to attack the Zapatistas. People fired machine guns into Zapatista villages, cut off people's limbs, and many others were disappeared, executed, or displaced from their homes. 

Zapatista major Ana María said, "they have begun to arrest and torture the civilian population... The government wants to finish us off, but the Zapatista Army is very large and is everywhere." Even a year later, Ana María counted 30 helicopters and "thousands and thousands" of soldiers. Hundreds of tanks and other military vehicles had entered many towns. The rebels acknowledged the need to risk their lives in service of their people with the slogan, "live for the country or die for freedom."

However, the Zapatistas persevered in solidarity with each other and the Earth, led by the Clandestine Revolutionary Indigenous Committee-General Command which oversaw the EZLN. They wanted a culture based on mutual respect, and they maintained this baseline of respect even during war.

No one was forced into military service. Each person was welcome to choose for themselves if they would risk their life in fighting. Women played key roles from the beginning. A woman major led the Zapatistas in taking the town of San Cristóbal de las Casas in Chiapas. Commander Ramona played a major part in the resulting peace dialog.

They practiced a deep humility, not letting anyone feel like they were special or better than the rest because of their position. When describing their top military leader subcommander Marcos, major Ana María said, "Marcos, like all the members of the [core planning committee], knows nothing and is nothing. Marcos is just another representative..." The top leader was even given the rank "subcommander" to remind everyone that he was subservient to the people.

Immediately the Zapatistas put into effect laws which they had prepared over the years. Many women had given input to decide the laws they would live by, and after the revolution, sexism dramatically diminished. Interviews with many women in 2015 showed that the changes were real and lasting.

They passed laws preserving the seas, rivers, and forests. People could keep enough land to sustain their family, but no one was allowed to hoard land or property. When individuals owned more than a certain number of acres, the extra was redistributed for communal farming. Anyone who hoarded wealth was considered at traitor, ensuring there would be no rich people to try and corrupt the leadership and society from within.

They ended property taxes and vastly reduced rents. Everyone was free to arm themselves and uphold their laws, and even organize their own self-protection groups. All prisoners were released except murderers, rapists, and drug trafficking bosses. A new social security system ensured that all abandoned children, wounded veterans, retirees, and elders would be taken care of. They developed a system of leadership that ensured that no one passed laws on everyone else. Rather, different layers of councils, each layer covering a larger area, helped coordinate cooperation and collective self-defense as needed.

Many people of unhealthy cultures have forgotten how to live in a good way -- they've forgotten how to live in a way where everyone upholds their laws and stand for what's right, and where the humans treat the Earth respectfully. They've forgotten how to live without sexism and racism and hatred and corruption. But after 500 years, the Zapatistas still remembered, and when they had the chance for a successful revolution, they created a healthy culture based on that ancient wisdom. And even as the Mexicans waged tremendous violence, they used violence to protect themselves and ensure they could choose the laws they lived by, and maintain a way of life where everyone accepted responsibility for standing for what's right.

One commander said, "Para todos, todo, para nosotros nada" -- For everyone, everything; for us, nothing. They offer their gifts for the good of the group. This person acknowledged that being a Zapatista was difficult. They sometimes only have hard tortillas to eat, and sometimes they fall sick due to poor food. They often sleep on hard floors or can't sleep for days and nights. Their lives are often at risk. But this man said why they accept this: "As Zapatistas, we have been declared terrorists for simply wanting to live, for asking for food, for health care, for education. But for us, in the eyes of the true man and true woman, terrorism is greed, racism, hate, and war. For true change, we are ready to die with dignity, in resistance, instead of waiting to die from curable diseases and hunger."

The Zapatistas' struggle continues as I write in 2024. The Mexican government changed the Constitution to acknowledge some of the Zapatistas' concerns, but then failed to implement many of their laws. Local landowners continue to coordinate with paramilitaries, police, and the military to fight the Zapatistas, disrupt their water sources, and steal their food.

One fighter noted, "We will always carry resistance and rebellion in our hearts, because we are guardians of Mother Earth, we are not the owners. The Earth is not ours, it belongs to all of us who fight for life. We were born in it, we live in it, we are going to take care of it and we are going to protect it -- and if necessary, we will die for it."

The Black Panthers, Apaches, and Zapatistas showed me what it's like to use violence in service of the community. No one in these stories used violence selfishly or deceitfully. I suspect everyone in these stories would have preferred peace, but when the options were self-defense or submission, they chose to use violence in service of the people they loved and in service of the Earth.